# About

An overview of Auth Basic with implementations using expres.

## HTTP

By default HTTP is *stateless* — there is no link between two requests, they are independent

https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Guides/Overview


## Cookies


In order to associte two requests we can use cookies.

When a client requests a resource, the server can include a cookie in the response:

```
# Request
GET /members HTTP/1.1

# Response
Set-Cookie: <cookie-name>=<cookie-value>
```

Then on future requests the browser automatically sends back that cookie to the server:

```
GET /members HTTP/1.1
Cookie: <cookie-name>=<cookie-value>
```

The server can read whatever information is inside the cookie.

However Cookies have a few limitations: 
- They are visible by the client
- Their sizes are limited (4 KB)
- A user can delete their cookies 
- A user can modify the cookie (unless it's server signed)
- By default only sent to the same Host

Docs
- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Guides/Overview
- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Guides/Cookies


## Sessions

One common approach is to store user information server side, usually in a database.

Then simply store an unique opaque value on the client:

```
sessionId=abc123
```

When the server receives the request it can read the cookie and look up the value in the database.

Then it knows which user is sent the request.

Express sets cookie cookies like this:

```
connect.sid=7V7VCdvxhwkQFxvbmELIZOI3GBKTUdi-.<signature>
```

Sessions are typically used when a website is server side rendered using HTML templates,

However they can also work with Single Page Apps.


How User Creation Works
- When the user signs-up the server receives the username & password
- The server stores the user details + a hashed password:

```json
  const bcrypt = require("bcryptjs");

  const passwordHash = await bcrypt.hash(password, 12);

  db.save(username, passwordHash)
```

On future logins, if the hash of the password matches the user is authenticated and a session is created.



## Bearer Tokens

For Single Page Applications (SPAs) Bearer Authentication are more common

Whoever "bears" (possesses) this token is considered authenticated

The token is sent using the `Authorization` header:

```
GET /api/orders HTTP/1.1
Authorization: Bearer <token>
```

Note — Use strong crypto to genereate a random token:

```javacsript
const crypto = require("node:crypto");

function generateBearerToken() {
  return "app_" + crypto.randomBytes(32).toString("base64url");
}
```

Note — you technically should store the HASH of a token, not the token itself.


Compare to cookies, whcih are automatically sent by browsers (`Cookie: name=value`)

Bearer tokens are manually added using JavaScript, ex:

```javascript
fetch('/api/profile', {
	headers: {
		Authorization: `Bearer ${token}`
	}
});
```

Docs
- https://www.passportjs.org/concepts/bearer-token
- https://www.passportjs.org/packages/passport-http-bearer


## JWTs

JWT (JSON Web Tokens) is a special format to send Tokens
- https://www.jwt.io/

```
<Header>.<Payload>.<Signature>
```

A JWT is self-contained so you don’t need a session table or cache like Redis. 

The signature ensures it has not been tampered with.

JWTs are useful when you want to ensure interoperability between systems.

ex: User logins with Google, which then sends you a JWT containing information about that user.

You can use the JWT signature to verify that it was actually generated by Google

Docs
- https://www.passportjs.org/packages/passport-jwt


## Single Page Apps

Single Page Applications (SPAs) can use Cookies or Bearer Tokens.

Conceptually they're similar:
- Session Cookie — "Here is my session ID"
- Bearer Token — "Here is my access token"

Both use HTTP Headers 
- Cookies use `Cookie: name=value`
- Tokens use `Authorization: Bearer MyToken123`

A major difference is how they are transported
- Cookies are automatically sent by browsers
- Bearer tokens must be manually added using JavaScript

Here is how you would include a token with the `fetch` API:

```javascript
fetch('/api/profile', {
	headers: {
		Authorization: `Bearer ${token}`
	}
});
```

So why use one over the other?

Bearer tokens fit better when the API is meant to be consumed by many kinds of clients
- Mobile apps, CLI tools, externals apps

Take the flow for a typical SPA:
- The browser loads the React app from a domain
- The SPA may make calls to several APIs

However if control both the UI and API (especially if they are same-site) cookies are often a great fit.
